README.md, before:

# foundata: guidelines, conventions, standards and related documents

This repository collects recommendations and rules [foundata](https://foundata.com/) is using to creates creative work (which includes source code) or doing operations. What makes sense to share in public will find its place in this repository.


## Table of contents

* [Ansible](#ansible)
* [Licensing](#licensing)


## Ansible

[Ansible](https://www.ansible.com/) is a simple, agentless IT automation tool.

* [Ansible style guide (`ansible-style-guide.md`)](./ansible-style-guide.md)
* [Showcase playbook to clarify the Ansible style guide (`ansible-style-guide-example.yml`)](./ansible-style-guide-example.yml)


## Licensing

Resources on how to choose, apply or change a license.

* [How to choose a license (`licensing-how-to-choose-a-license.md`)](./licensing-how-to-choose-a-license.md)
* [How to apply licenses (`licensing-how-to-apply.md`)](./licensing-how-to-apply.md)



## Licensing, copyright

<!--REUSE-IgnoreStart-->
Copyright (c) 2020, 2023 [foundata GmbH](https://foundata.com/)

This project is licensed under the [Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/deed) license, see [`LICENSES/CC-BY-SA-4.0.txt`](./LICENSES/CC-BY-SA-4.0.txt) for the full text.

This project conforms to the [REUSE specification](https://reuse.software/spec/) and provides a human- and machine-readable [copyright file](.reuse/dep5), denoting the respective license(s) of all files. Some files might also provide an additional `SDPX-License-Identifier:` comment.
<!--REUSE-IgnoreEnd-->

Commit message:

Use current licensing section template; Typos

README.md, after:

# foundata: guidelines, conventions, standards and related documents

This repository collects recommendations and rules [foundata](https://foundata.com/) is using to create creative work (which includes source code) or doing operations. What makes sense to share in public will find its place in this repository.


## Table of contents

* [Ansible](#ansible)
* [Licensing](#licensing)


## Ansible

[Ansible](https://www.ansible.com/) is a simple, agentless IT automation tool.

* [Ansible style guide (`ansible-style-guide.md`)](./ansible-style-guide.md)
* [Showcase playbook to clarify the Ansible style guide (`ansible-style-guide-example.yml`)](./ansible-style-guide-example.yml)


## Licensing

Resources on how to choose, apply or change a license.

* [How to choose a license (`licensing-how-to-choose-a-license.md`)](./licensing-how-to-choose-a-license.md)
* [How to apply licenses (`licensing-how-to-apply.md`)](./licensing-how-to-apply.md)



## Licensing, copyright

Copyright (c) 2020, 2023 [foundata GmbH](https://foundata.com/)

<!--REUSE-IgnoreStart-->
This project is licensed under the [Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/deed) license, see [`LICENSES/CC-BY-SA-4.0.txt`](./LICENSES/CC-BY-SA-4.0.txt) for the full text.

The [`.reuse/dep5`](.reuse/dep5) file provides detailed licensing and copyright information in a human- and machine-readable format. This includes parts that may be subject to different licensing or usage terms, such as third party components. The repository conforms to the [REUSE specification](https://reuse.software/spec/), you can use [`reuse spdx`](https://reuse.readthedocs.io/en/latest/readme.html#cli) to create a [SPDX software bill of materials (SBOM)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_Package_Data_Exchange).
<!--REUSE-IgnoreEnd-->
